



Network Working Group                                        D. von Hugo
Internet-Draft                                          Deutsche Telekom
Intended status: Standards Track                             B. Sarikaya
Expires: 8 May 2023                                      4 November 2022


     The Need for New Authentication Methods for Internet of Things
                    draft-hsothers-iotsens-ps-03.txt

Abstract

   In framework of future 6G the need for easy and secure connectivity
   between a great amount of small devices as sensors and household
   appliances will be essential.  Such massive Internet of Things (mIoT)
   requires authentication methods which are reliable also in case of
   vulnerable wireless links and work for simple cheap (dumb) devices.

   Aim of this document is to lay ground for the need for new
   authentication models and admission methods in the framework of
   devices (e.g., machines in IoT communication) within a (wireless or
   wireline-based) network.

   Simple devices may only have a minimum amount of physical interfaces
   available.  As an example for establishing an out-of-band channel for
   exchange of authentication material radio sensing technology may
   serve.  This is currently under investigation for Wireless LAN and
   upcoming cellular radio at both IEEE and 3GPP.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 8 May 2023.







von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  3GPP and Wireless LAN Sensing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  IoT Authentication Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  General Considerations and Requirements . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  Exemplary Protocols for IoT Authentication  . . . . . . .   5
     4.3.  Assessment of Existing Authentication Methods . . . . . .   6
   5.  The Need for New Authentication Models  . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Out-of Band Channel for Device Provisioning . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  The Gaps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   Future networking to make full use of 5G capabilities or even
   resembling an evolution to beyond 5G will have to exploit a much more
   heterogeneous environment in terms of network and device connectivity
   technologies and applications.  In addition, ease of use for
   customers and an as far as possible human-independent (autonomous)
   operation of a multitude of devices and machines (things) should be
   enabled.

   Basic pre-requisite for flawless operation of any communication
   service is secure and safe access to the network.  Both the device
   and the network infrastructure have to authenticate each other during



von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


   the bootstrapping process, which starts when the device is switched
   into operational status.  Depending on the specific access technology
   or family of technology variants multiple authentication methods have
   been developed and deployed.  Regarding the aspect of ease of use and
   in view of the upcoming use case of massive Internet of Things (mIoT)
   with huge amounts of cheap und thus very simple devices many of the
   existing authentication methods will not be optimal here.  E.g.,
   authentication models like 802.1X [IEEE802.1X] are based on human
   intervention and do not scale well for mIoT.  Same holds true
   similarly for 3GPP authentication, where user equipment (UE) has to
   be equipped with a USIM (Universal Subscriber Identity Module) to
   access a cellular network and the user has to provide a secret key,
   i.e., PIN (Personal Identification Number).

   Also such approach requires exchange of information on the
   communication channel in advance of the authentication and
   identification and thus could result in security issues.

   To overcome those issues and lower the risk higher levels of
   admission methods need a second (or out-of-band, OOB) channel to
   communicate with the device for authentication.  Provision of at
   least two independent channels would allow for and be part of the
   Multi- or Two-Factor Authentication (MFA/TFA/2FA) required for
   security in high-risk scenarios.

   Device Provisioning Protocol (DPP) developed by Wi-Fi Alliance makes
   use of an out-of band channel beside the Wi-Fi interface for
   bootstrapping and authentication [dpp].  Thus another (trusted)
   device such as a mobile phone can be employed to exchange essential
   data via, e.g., Bluetooth or Near-Field Communications (NFC).  Also
   visible (QR code or blinking LED) or audible (melody, human speech)
   information can be used via a smart phone's built-in camera or
   microphone, assuming that advances in signal processing may make it
   possible to realize these and similar use cases.  More examples are
   mentioned in [Henning].

   However, this approach requires again human intervention and/or a
   second interface both at the 'dumb' device and at the point of
   attachment to the network (e.g., Wi-Fi access point).  An alternative
   may be to use the single radio interface in terms of sensing the
   signal strength and temporal and geographical change of the signal
   pattern as has been investigated by IEEE and 3GPP:

   IEEE802.11 has a project on Wireless LAN (WLAN sensing) and 802.11bf
   task group (TG) is in charge of this project [BFSFD].  3GPP is
   studying for Rel. 19 the topic of Integrated Sensing and
   Communication [TR22.837].  More discussion on radio sensing can be
   found in Section 3.



von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  3GPP and Wireless LAN Sensing

   3GPP document [TR22.837] defines many use cases that vary from indoor
   using 3GPP signal measured by UE to outdoor using 3GPP signal
   measured at the Base Stations.  Use cases include intruder detection
   in smart home, pedestrian or animal intrusion detection on a highway,
   rainfall monitoring, flooding in smart cities, Automated Guided
   Vehicles (AGVs) detection and tracking in smart factories.  It is
   foreseen that operators will define sensing area whereby the Base
   Stations and UEs can be used in sensing the characteristics of an
   airborne object of interest generating and reporting sensing
   measurement data (e.g., related to an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
   position, velocity) to a 5G sensing processing entity.

   IEEE 802.11 Wireless LAN sensing being developed by TGbf is based on
   obtaining physical Channel State Information (CSI) measurements
   between a transmitter and receiver WLAN nodes.  Using these
   measurements, presence of obstacles between a transmitter and
   receiver can be detected and tracked.  This way, using feature
   extraction and classification of artificial intelligence (AI), more
   higher level tasks like human activity recognition and object
   detection may become available for authentication purposes.  In
   addition to already proposed use cases as room sensing, i.e.,
   presence detection, gesture recognition, or building a 3D picture of
   an environment also the unambiguous identification of an IoT device
   or the owner of that device could be achieved.

   Wireless sensing technologies such as New Radio (NR)-based sensing
   and WLAN sensing aim at acquiring information about a remote object
   while the corresponding perception data can be utilized for analysis
   to obtain meaningful information.  Here use cases on combining sensor
   data with other (e.g., location) and transparent sensing as well as
   protection of sensing information may be adapted to provide
   information usable for IoT device authentication.

4.  IoT Authentication Issues







von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


4.1.  General Considerations and Requirements

   IoT applications may cover a broad range of domains from smart
   cities, industry, and homes to personal (e.g., wearable) devices, and
   can reach a huge number of entities.  Since applications as e-health
   and connection to critical infrastructure may be included, the
   security requirements in terms of preventing unauthorized access are
   very high.  Therefore very robust authentication mechanisms have to
   be applied.  At the same time depending on the specific scenario a
   trade-off between resources as processing power and memory as driven
   by security protocol complexity has to be considered.  Therefore it
   should be possible for the owner to flexibly choose and subsequently
   agree with the authentication system on the method to authenticate a
   device and the correspondingly required set of characteristic
   parameters.  Consideration of the amount and type of resources as
   well as their location and availability will play a role: E.g.,
   whether these resources are provided either within the local system
   components (e.g., the device itself and the point of attachment or
   access point) and/or within the network infrastructure (e.g., an edge
   cloud instance or a central data base).

   The result of the detection process (e.g., radio wave analysis
   outcome as parameters as modulation scheme, number of carriers, and
   fingerprinting or QR code detection) has to be compared with the
   required (correct) reference parameter values which are safely and
   confidentially stored within the network.

   On all levels of handling these data, i.e., storage, processing, and
   transport via a communication network, the integrity of the content
   has to be preserved.  One should keep in mind, that any unintended
   authentication request should be prevented to minimize the risk of
   occasional attachment of malicious users to networks and subsequent
   exposure of sensitive user data.

   [RFC8576] serves as a reference for additional details about IoT
   specific security considerations including the area of authentication
   and documents their security challenges, threat models, and possible
   mitigations.

4.2.  Exemplary Protocols for IoT Authentication

   OAuth [RFC6749] protocol extends traditional client-server
   authentication by providing a third party with a token.  Since such
   token resembles a different set of credentials compared to those of
   the resource owner, the device needs not be allowed to use the
   resource owner's credentials to access protected resources.  In
   addition [RFC8628] specifies how to complete the authorization
   request of a device with a one-way channel via a secondary device,



von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


   such as a smartphone.

   Task of a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) with its various components
   (authorities) is to manage (including generation, distribution,
   operational usage, secure storage as well as revocation) certificates
   (e.g., of type X.509) to enable authentication and identification of
   IoT devices.  The role of an IoT client to communicate with PKI
   system may be played by the local access point which usually has
   corresponding processing capabilities rather than the simple and
   cheap IoT devices.

   In case of manufacturer-installed X.509 certificates the
   'Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key Infrastructure' (BRSKI) protocol
   [RFC8995] provides means for authentication both devices and the
   network and specifies a Secure Key Infrastructure (SKI) for
   bootstrapping.

   EAP (Extensible Authentication Protocol) [RFC3748] defines a flexible
   authentication framework for network access of a peer towards an
   authenticator or authentication server.  Advantage of EAP for IoT is
   the support of multiple authentication mechanisms without need for
   pre-negotiation.  Recently, Nimble out-of-band authentication for EAP
   or EAP-NOOB [RFC9140] was proposed to apply EAP to very simple IoT
   devices.  Here, the need for pre-established (e.g., manufacturer
   provided certificate) relation with server or user or pre-
   provisioning of identifier or credentials could be avoided.  For sake
   of security they need, however, a second interface for out-of-band
   communication.  This OOB channel enables the device to send critical
   data needed, i.e., a secret nonce to EAP server.  In addition, EAP
   ecosystem may be too complex for simple IoT devices and EAP-NOOB
   would require user assistance in message exchange for authenticating
   in-band key exchange.  Therefore a more simple approach should be
   envisioned.

4.3.  Assessment of Existing Authentication Methods

   In view of the above mentioned methods using out-of band channel for
   IoT authentication the advantage of a mechanism relying on radio
   sensing may have the advantage not to need explicit user interaction.
   Beside it does not require the user to know any key, identifier, or
   password for the IoT device to be authenticated.  For other OOB
   technics the need for a pre-defined means of identifying the device
   (e.g., physical, acoustic, photographic or video representation,
   unique description in terms of parameters, etc.) may be the only
   prerequisite for authentication.  In addition, in case of radio
   sensing no other interface at the IoT device would be required beyond
   the radio interface which can be used for both, communication and the
   OOB transmission of the identity and unique token.



von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


5.  The Need for New Authentication Models

   We solicit future work on the out-of band channels for device
   provisioning and the gaps identified below.

5.1.  Out-of Band Channel for Device Provisioning

   The newly to be designed authentication model for IoT devices shall
   be applicable to OOB transmission of a certificate to the
   authenticating entity as via, e.g., above mentioned radio sensing.
   However, other means to exchange the essential information may also
   be chosen such as detection by touch, accelerometer, and gyro sensors
   or cameras.  LED (Light Emitting Diode) using LED light indicator
   and/or emitter available on the device can support LED light based
   authentication, e.g., via a smartphone with a client for
   certification.  Experiments on such an approach have been set up and
   tested during lighthouse project (see, e.g., [Lins18], [Oden18]).

   Criteria for choice of the corresponding technology depend on the use
   case and cover are reliable operation (working), scalability, ease of
   use and convenience, security, and many more.

   The created token or signature (fingerprint) shall serve in a similar
   way as a password [Wang3] to allow the detection and authentication
   of the device by comparison with pre-shared and stored information.

   Bluetooth Mesh Network standard for Bluetooth low energy (BLE)
   wireless technology [simpleconn] defines Output OOB and Input OOB
   authentication methods between a device and the provisioner, e.g., an
   access point.

   In case of Output OOB, the unprovisioned device picks a random number
   and outputs that number in a way which is explained next.  For
   example, if the unprovisioned device is a light bulb, it could blink
   a given number of times.  If the device has an LCD screen, it could
   show the random number as a multiple digit value.  The user of the
   provisioner inputs the number observed to authenticate the
   unprovisioned device.  After the random number has been input, the
   provisioner generates and checks a confirmation value.  The check
   confirmation value operation is identical within the overall
   authentication step, regardless of the authentication method used.

   In case of Input OOB, the provisioner generates a random number,
   displays it, and then prompts the user to input the random number
   into the unprovisioned device using an appropriate action.  For
   instance, a light switch may allow the user to input the random
   number by pressing a button an appropriate number of times within a
   certain period.  After finishing the authentication action, the



von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


   unprovisioned device sends a Provisioning Input Complete PDU to the
   provisioner to inform it that the random number has been input.  The
   process continues with the check confirmation value operation like in
   the case of Output OOB [simpleconn].

   For use of 3GPP and Wireless LAN sensing as an OOB channel in IoT
   authentication, most possibly output OOB channel needs to be
   investigated.  Since input OOB requires user interaction the use of
   radio sensing as an input OOB channel should not be the approach to
   be chosen.

5.2.  The Gaps

   Main gap between existing methods and the new authentication model to
   be derived is the required user interaction.  Another challenge may
   be naming and re-naming of the devices to enable re-using (e.g., home
   appliances after moving to a new flat) or replacement (e.g., of a
   broken light bulb by a new one).  For this either use of geo-
   locational parameters or time stamps with respect to, e.g., time of
   production or first installation (deployment or start of operation)
   may be considered.  The automatic exchange of the old identity with
   the new one during re-booting may demand for a standard geospatial
   naming.

   Aim of this document is to stimulate discussion on future directions
   in work at IETF towards secure and confident authentication of IoT
   devices to the network, independent of the access technology and the
   features of the IoT device.

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request to IANA for allocation of new
   registries.

7.  Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security concerns but tries to identify
   how to increase security in future IoT by discussing the issues of
   robust but easy to apply authentication mechanisms.

8.  Acknowledgements

   Discussions with Jan Janak, Henning Schulzrinne, and Michael
   Richardson as well as a review by Janfred Rieckers and Jari Arkko
   helped us improve the draft.

9.  References




von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [BFSFD]    IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              IEEE P802.11 - TASK GROUP BF (WLAN SENSING) 11-21/0504r2
              "Specification Framework for TGbf"", July 2021.

   [dpp]      Wi-Fi Alliance, "Wi-Fi Device Provisioning Protocol
              (DPP)", Wi-Fi Alliance Specification version 1.1, 2018,
              <https://www.wi-
              fi.org/download.php?file=/sites/default/files/private/
              Device_Provisioning_Protocol_Specification_v1.1_1.pdf>.

   [Henning]  Schulzrinne, H., "Do We Still Need Wi-Fi in the Era of 5G
              (and 6G)?", February 2021.

   [I-D.irtf-t2trg-secure-bootstrapping-02]
              Sethi, M., Sarikaya, B., and D. Garcia-Carrillo,
              "Terminology and processes for initial security setup of
              IoT devices", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              irtf-t2trg-secure-bootstrapping-02, 25 April 2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-irtf-t2trg-secure-
              bootstrapping-02.txt>.

   [IEEE802.1X]
              IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              "802.1X - Port Based Network Access Control"", January
              2020.

   [Lins18]   Linssen, A., "Secure Authentication of Remote IoT Devices
              Using Visible Light Communication: Transmitter Design and
              Implementation", Columbia University , 2018,
              <https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/papers/
              Lins18_Secure.pdf>.







von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


   [Oden18]   Odental, H., "Secure Authentication of Remote IoT Devices
              Using Visible Light Communication: Receiver Design and
              Implementation", Columbia University , 2018,
              <https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/papers/
              Oden18_Secure.pdf>.

   [RFC3748]  Aboba, B., Blunk, L., Vollbrecht, J., Carlson, J., and H.
              Levkowetz, Ed., "Extensible Authentication Protocol
              (EAP)", RFC 3748, DOI 10.17487/RFC3748, June 2004,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3748>.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., Ed., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework",
              RFC 6749, DOI 10.17487/RFC6749, October 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6749>.

   [RFC8576]  Garcia-Morchon, O., Kumar, S., and M. Sethi, "Internet of
              Things (IoT) Security: State of the Art and Challenges",
              RFC 8576, DOI 10.17487/RFC8576, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8576>.

   [RFC8628]  Denniss, W., Bradley, J., Jones, M., and H. Tschofenig,
              "OAuth 2.0 Device Authorization Grant", RFC 8628,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8628, August 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8628>.

   [RFC8994]  Eckert, T., Ed., Behringer, M., Ed., and S. Bjarnason, "An
              Autonomic Control Plane (ACP)", RFC 8994,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8994, May 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8994>.

   [RFC8995]  Pritikin, M., Richardson, M., Eckert, T., Behringer, M.,
              and K. Watsen, "Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key
              Infrastructure (BRSKI)", RFC 8995, DOI 10.17487/RFC8995,
              May 2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8995>.

   [RFC9140]  Aura, T., Sethi, M., and A. Peltonen, "Nimble Out-of-Band
              Authentication for EAP (EAP-NOOB)", RFC 9140,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9140, December 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9140>.

   [simpleconn]
              Bluetooth Special Interest Group, "Mesh Profile",
              Version 1.0.1, 2019,
              <https://www.bluetooth.com/specifications/specs/mesh-
              profile-1-0-1/>.

   [TR22.837] 3GPP Draft Technical Report Release 19, "3GPP, "Study on
              Integrated Sensing and Communication"", 2022.



von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                  [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication       November 2022


   [Wang3]    Wang, H., Lymberopoulos, D., and J. Liu, "Sensor-Based
              User Authentication", EWSN 2015, LNCS 8965, 168 , 2015.

Acknowledgements

Authors' Addresses

   Dirk von Hugo
   Deutsche Telekom
   Deutsche-Telekom-Allee 9
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany
   Email: Dirk.von-Hugo@telekom.de


   Behcet Sarikaya
   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org


































von Hugo & Sarikaya        Expires 8 May 2023                  [Page 11]
