



Network Working Group                                        D. von Hugo
Internet-Draft                                          Deutsche Telekom
Intended status: Standards Track                             B. Sarikaya
Expires: 12 January 2023                                    11 July 2022


     The Need for New Authentication Methods for Internet of Things
                    draft-hsothers-iotsens-ps-02.txt

Abstract

   The document attempts to establish the need for new authentication
   methods in the Internet of Things (IoT) as a future networking area
   beyond 5G going into 6G for standardization.  Several scenarios are
   described where the current authentication protocols do not work or
   are insufficient.  Wireless LAN/6G sensing is established as an
   admission method that can be used within the framework of Device
   Provisioning Protocol and LED light and others as out-of band channel
   based authentication which can be further explored.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 12 January 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2022 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.










von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Simplified BSD License text
   as described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Sensing in Device Provisioning Protocol . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  IoT Authentication Protocols  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.1.  Autonomic Control Plane and Out-of Band Channel Usage in
           IoT Authentication  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  The Need for New Authentication Models  . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     5.1.  IoT Applications Commonly Used  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   Future networking to make full use of 5G capabilities or even
   resembling an evolution to beyond 5G will have to exploit a much more
   heterogeneous environment in terms of network and device connectivity
   technologies and applications.  In addition, ease of use for
   customers and human-independent operation of a multitude of devices
   and machines (things) has to be provided.

   Therefore current authentication models like 802.1X [IEEE802.1X]
   which are based on human intervention do not fit well.  Also this
   model does not scale well for the Internet of Things (IoT).

   Device Provisioning Protocol (DPP) developed by Wi-Fi Alliance makes
   it possible that IoT devices with Wi-Fi interface can be bootstrapped
   and authenticated using another device such as a mobile phone [dpp].
   DPP uses different out-of band channels to get authentication
   information from the device such as Bluetooth, Near-Field
   Communications (NFC), QR code, etc.




von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


   The idea of using a mobile phone for IoT authentication also opens up
   the possibility of better methods of admission and makes it possible
   to realize the use cases such as: Authenticating the device that is
   playing a melody, or a person has just touched; authenticating
   devices, i.e. smart teapot with certain manifests, like blinking red
   and blue; authenticate the device when a camera is pointed at it; and
   the like [Henning].  Advances in signal processing may make it
   possible to realize these and similar use cases.  Here, we will
   mention Wi-Fi sensing activity that is being taken up by IEEE 802.11.

   Detection and interpretation of audio signals by microphones and
   corresponding
   software has been under investigation since some time and
   can be achieved with high precision nowadays.  Coding of haptic
   information is currently under standardisation at IEEE P.1918
   [P1918].
   Using an objects' position to grant authentication could be achieved
   via geometrical information
   (as e.g., position and orientation of a trusted device like the
   camera) or via radio sensing.

   IEEE 802.11 has a project on Wireless LAN (WLAN sensing) and 802.11bf
   task group (TG) in charge of this project [BFSFD].  Use cases for
   802.11bf TG includes room sensing, i.e., presence detection, counting
   the number of people in the room, localization of active people,
   audio with user detection, gesture recognition at different ranges,
   device proximity detection, home appliance control.  There are also
   health care related use cases like breathing/heart rate detection,
   surveillance of persons of interest, building a 3D picture of an
   environment, in car sensing for driver sleepiness detection
   [BFUseCases].

   TGbf is also working on Specification Framework Document with an
   outline of each the functional blocks that will be a part of the
   final amendment like wireless LAN sensing procedure [BFSFD].  TGbf
   sensing is based on obtaining physical Channel State Information
   (CSI) measurements between a transmitter and receiver WLAN nodes,
   called stations (STA).  Using these measurements, presence of
   obstacles between a transmitter and receiver can be detected and
   tracked.  This way, using feature extraction and classification of
   artificial intelligence (AI), more higher level tasks like human
   activity recognition and object detection are available for
   authentication purposes, while corresponding authentication context
   information can be obtained through computation of phase differences,
   etc.






von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


   TGbf Wi-Fi Sensing (SENS) is achieved by signaling between just an
   initiator and a responder.  TGbf may also define more effective
   collaborative SENS (in short, CSENS) where multiple SENS-enabled
   devices can collaborate as a group in an orderly fashion to capture
   additional information about the surrounding environment [Rest21].

   While Wi-Fi sensing may lead to higher levels of admission methods
   for IoT devices there is a need to communicate with the device for
   authentication.  Just like in Device Provisioning Protocol, there is
   a need to use out-of band channels to provide two independent
   channels to allow for secure Two-Factor Authentication (TFA/2FA).
   These issues will be exploited further in the following sections.

2.  Conventions and Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   Sensing (SENS) is defined as the usage of received Wi-Fi signals from
   a Station (STA) to detect features (i.e., range, velocity, angular,
   motion, presence or proximity, gesture, etc.) of intended targets
   (i.e., object, human, animal, etc.) in a given environment (i.e.,
   house, office, room, vehicle, enterprise, etc.).

   Collaborative sensing (CSENS) defines the operation in which multiple
   SENS enabled devices can collaborate as a group in an orderly fashion
   to capture additional information about the surrounding environment
   and allow for more precise detection thus enabling a more reliable
   authentication.

   Multi-band sensing is defined as sensing using both sub-7-GHz Channel
   State Information (CSI) measurements that provide indication of
   relatively large motions and that can propagate through obstacles
   (e.g., walls) and 60-GHz Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI)
   measurements at mmWave that provide highly-directional information
   through the usage of beam forming toward a given receiver, but have
   small range due to the presence of blockers (e.g., walls).











von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


3.  Sensing in Device Provisioning Protocol

   Aim of this document is to lay ground for the need for new
   authentication models in the framework of devices (e.g., machines in
   IoT communication) within a (wireless or wireline-based) network.
   Currently employed authentication models (such as e.g., 802.1X
   certificate model) is based on a human being using the machine and
   providing credentials (e.g., user name/password or a permitted
   digital certificate) to the authenticator.  Similarly, for user
   equipment (UE) to access a cellular network the device has to be
   equipped with a USIM and the user has to provide a secret key, i.e.,
   PIN (Personal Identification Number).  With the use case of massive
   IoT (mIoT) as foreseen, e.g., in 5G and with an increasing amount of
   devices within a household (smart home) and/or in the ownership of a
   customer (smart watch etc.) the need for an ease-of-use admission
   model arises.

   Focusing on corresponding procedures starting with detection
   (sensing) of a new device to admit it in the local network and
   subsequent mutual authentication of the device by and to the network,
   a set of potential technologies are identified and described to allow
   for analysis in terms of criteria as reliable operation (working),
   scalability, ease of use and convenience, security, and many more.

   Most of the state-of-art identification/admission techniques to
   authenticate the user use finger prints a.k.a. touch id and facial
   identification and they use detection by touch, accelerometer, and
   gyro sensors or cameras.  They are based on creating a signature, or
   the user's already stored password [Wang3].  Sensing
   (together with intelligent interpretation using possibly neural
   network models) will allow the detection of the device playing a
   melody, blinking red and blue, being pointed at, or somebody just
   touched and the like.

   Sensing provides a natural extension to the Device Provisioning
   Protocol as a new technique for admission of an IoT device to the
   local network.  So since it is able to cover a wide range of use
   cases possibly applicable to future generations of network and of
   users, upcoming new applications and devices, sensing presents itself
   as the preferable admission protocol.











von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


4.  IoT Authentication Protocols

   Since IoT applications cover a broad range of domains from smart
   cities, industry, and homes to personal (e.g., wearable) devices,
   including security and privacy sensitive areas as e-health, and can
   reach a huge number of entities the security requirements in terms of
   preventing unauthorized access to data are very high.  Therefore very
   robust authentication mechanisms have to be applied.  At the same
   time depending on the specific scenario a trade-off between resources
   as processing power and memory and security protocol complexity has
   to be considered.  Also a plethora of attack scenarios has to be in
   focus as well as scalability of the considered implicit and explicit
   hardware- and software-based authentication procedures.  [RFC8576]
   serves as a reference for details about IoT specific security
   considerations including the area of authentication and documents
   their specific security challenges, threat models, and possible
   mitigations.  Also the OAuth [RFC6749] protocol is referred to which
   extends traditional client-server authentication by providing a third
   party client with a token instead of allowing it to use the resource
   owner's credentials to access protected resources while such token
   resembles a different set of credentials than those of the resource
   owner.

   On the other hand to authenticate a device based on a set of
   characteristic parameters which should be flexibly chosen by the
   owner and subsequently made known to the authentication system will
   require a certain level of processing and storage capacity either
   within the local system components (e.g., the device itself and the
   wireless point of attachment or access point) and/or within the
   network (e.g., an edge cloud instance or a central data base).  The
   result of the detection process (e.g., radio wave analysis outcome in
   terms of parameters as modulation scheme, number of carriers, and
   fingerprinting) has to be compared with the required (correct)
   parameter values which are safely stored within the network
   components.  On all levels of handling these data, i.e., storage,
   processing, and transport via a communication network, the integrity
   of the content has to be preserved.  One should keep in mind, that
   any unintended authentication request should be prevented to minimize
   the risk of occasional attachment to networks and subsequent exposure
   to attack to sensitive user data.

4.1.  Autonomic Control Plane and Out-of Band Channel Usage in IoT
      Authentication

   Authentication for IoT may rely on a protocol such as 6LowPAN (Low-
   power Wireless Personal Area Network) which is defined for optimizing
   the efficient routing of IPv6 packets for resource constrained
   machine- type communication applications.



von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


   [RFC8995] on 'Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key Infrastructure' (BRSKI)
   deals with authentication of devices, including sending
   authorizations to the device as to what network they should join, and
   how to authenticate that network by specifying automated
   bootstrapping of an Autonomic Control Plane (ACP) [RFC8994].  Secure
   Key Infrastructure (SKI) bootstrapping using manufacturer- installed
   X.509 certificates combined with a manufacturer's authorizing
   service, both online and offline, is called the Bootstrapping Remote
   Secure Key Infrastructure (BRSKI) protocol.  Bootstrapping a new
   device can occur when using a routable address and a cloud service,
   only link- local connectivity, or limited/disconnected networks and
   includes support for deployment models with less stringent security
   requirements.  When the cryptographic identity of the new SKI is
   successfully deployed to the device, completion of bootstrapping is
   achieved.  A locally issued certificate can be deployed to the device
   via the established secure connection as well.

   DPP is based on the usage of out-of band channel usage.  LED light so
   far appeared to be the most commonly used out-of band channel.  Here
   we describe two projects, the lighthouse and EAP-NOOB.

   LED light based authentication attempts to authenticate hard to reach
   IoT devices using LED light indicator available on the device.  Here
   LED light is used as an out-of-band channel in addition to a wireless
   LAN peer-to-peer connection to the device using a smartphone over TLS
   connection which is not secured.  Smartphone initially obtains
   device's public key certificate.  Smartphone as the client requests
   certificate fingerprint over visible LED light channel.  Device
   transmits fingerprint by modulating LED.  Client receives data with
   camera and decodes.  Client compares TLS certificate fingerprint with
   received fingerprint to complete authentication.  LED light based
   authentication does not support multiple ways of getting the hash
   value from the device.  Although most devices have LED type of output
   leading to visible light communication, some devices have speaker
   type of output and not readily visible [Lins18], [Oden18].

   LED light based authentication is similar to EAP-NOOB, Nimble out-of-
   band authentication for EAP [RFC9140] where Zigbee or 802.15.4
   channel is the main channel and blinking LED light is used as out-of-
   band channel.  In the main channel, the device is connected to the
   Internet over 802.15.4 channel to a controller (a laptop, acting as a
   Wi-Fi access point) which connects over the Internet to AAA server as
   EAP server where the user has an account.  In the OOB channel, the
   device is connected to a smartphone using blinking LED light and the
   smartphone is connected to AAA server using its 4G/5G air interface.
   OOB channel enables the device to send critical data needed i.e.  a
   secret nonce to EAP server.  EAP-NOOB protocol architecture includes
   RADIUS which is used to encode EAP messages and constrained



von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


   Application Protocol, CoAP which is a simplified HTTP.  CoAP is used
   in transporting the nonce.  EAP-NOOB requires AAA server and user
   account on the server, i.e. human interaction.

   When compared to the above out-of band channel use in IoT
   authentication a mechanism relying on Wi-Fi sensing gesture detection
   does not require the user to know any key, identifier, or password
   for the device to be authenticated.  A pre-defined type of access to
   the device (e.g., physical, photographic or video representation,
   unique description in terms of parameters, etc.) shall be a
   prerequisite for authentication.  In addition, no second interface at
   the IoT device would be required beyond the radio signal which can be
   used for both, communication and the OOB transmission of the secret.

5.  The Need for New Authentication Models

   LED light is one-directional initiated by the sensor.  The advantages
   of LED light as out-of band channel is that LED light is readily
   available in every smartphone and LED light has some good security
   properties, because of visibility, man-in-the middle attacks can be
   easily mitigated.

   While OOB channel is universal, i.e. it can apply to any type of IoT
   device not all devices have a light or are visible.  For for future
   work, we need to think of multiple ways to do authentication, not
   just one, even for the same device.  Some devices will have speakers,
   for example, or may not be readily visible.

5.1.  IoT Applications Commonly Used

   There are many IoT applications for home usage that enable
   authentication as well as configuration of the devices such as
   Homekit.  Device vendor like Feit Electric also make similar
   applications.  These apps have a common problem: when a device, like
   a light bulb goes bad, there is no easy way to remove it from all the
   features like groups, scenes, automations that the bulb was part of.
   The main issue is the lack of search/replace one device with another.
   This brings the need for naming IoT devices.  A standard geospatial
   naming needs to be developed so that the developers can use it in
   developing their IoT applications.

6.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.







von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


7.  Security Considerations

   This document raises no new security concerns but tries to identify
   how to increase security in future IoT by discussing the issues of
   robust but easy to apply authentication mechanisms.

8.  Acknowledgements

   Discussions with Jan Janak, Henning Schulzrinne, and Michael
   Richardson helped us improve the draft.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

9.2.  Informative References

   [BFSFD]    IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              IEEE P802.11 - TASK GROUP BF (WLAN SENSING) 11-21/0504r2
              "Specification Framework for TGbf"", July 2021.

   [BFUseCases]
              IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              IEEE P802.11 - TASK GROUP BF (WLAN SENSING) 11-20/1712r2
              "WiFi Sensing Use Cases"", January 2021.

   [dpp]      Wi-Fi Alliance, "Wi-Fi Device Provisioning Protocol
              (DPP)", Wi-Fi Alliance Specification version 1.1, 2018,
              <https://www.wi-
              fi.org/download.php?file=/sites/default/files/private/
              Device_Provisioning_Protocol_Specification_v1.1_1.pdf>.

   [Henning]  Schulzrinne, H., "Do We Still Need Wi-Fi in the Era of 5G
              (and 6G)?", February 2021.

   [Henning2] Jan Janak, Luoyao Hao and Henning Schulzrinne, "How do we
              program the Internet of Things at scale?", September 2021.





von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


   [I-D.irtf-t2trg-secure-bootstrapping-02]
              Sethi, M., Sarikaya, B., and D. Garcia-Carrillo,
              "Terminology and processes for initial security setup of
              IoT devices", Work in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-
              irtf-t2trg-secure-bootstrapping-02, 25 April 2022,
              <https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-irtf-t2trg-secure-
              bootstrapping-02.txt>.

   [IEEE802.11]
              IEEE, "IEEE Std. 802.11-2016", December 2016,
              <https://standards.ieee.org/findstds/
              standard/802.11-2016.html>.

   [IEEE802.1X]
              IEEE, "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
              "802.1X - Port Based Network Access Control"", January
              2020.

   [Lins18]   Linssen, A., "Secure Authentication of Remote IoT Devices
              Using Visible Light Communication: Transmitter Design and
              Implementation", Columbia University , 2018,
              <https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/papers/
              Lins18_Secure.pdf>.

   [Oden18]   Odental, H., "Secure Authentication of Remote IoT Devices
              Using Visible Light Communication: Receiver Design and
              Implementation", Columbia University , 2018,
              <https://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/papers/
              Oden18_Secure.pdf>.

   [P1918]    IEEE Standards Working Group 1918.1, "Tactile Internet",
              July 2016.

   [Rest21]   Restuccia, F., "IEEE 802.11bf: Toward Ubiquitous Wi-Fi
              Sensing", arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14918 7 pages, March
              2021.

   [RFC6749]  Hardt, D., Ed., "The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework",
              RFC 6749, DOI 10.17487/RFC6749, October 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6749>.

   [RFC8576]  Garcia-Morchon, O., Kumar, S., and M. Sethi, "Internet of
              Things (IoT) Security: State of the Art and Challenges",
              RFC 8576, DOI 10.17487/RFC8576, April 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8576>.






von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       The Need for IoT Authentication           July 2022


   [RFC8994]  Eckert, T., Ed., Behringer, M., Ed., and S. Bjarnason, "An
              Autonomic Control Plane (ACP)", RFC 8994,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8994, May 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8994>.

   [RFC8995]  Pritikin, M., Richardson, M., Eckert, T., Behringer, M.,
              and K. Watsen, "Bootstrapping Remote Secure Key
              Infrastructure (BRSKI)", RFC 8995, DOI 10.17487/RFC8995,
              May 2021, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8995>.

   [RFC9140]  Aura, T., Sethi, M., and A. Peltonen, "Nimble Out-of-Band
              Authentication for EAP (EAP-NOOB)", RFC 9140,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9140, December 2021,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9140>.

   [Wang3]    Wang, H., Lymberopoulos, D., and J. Liu, "Sensor-Based
              User Authentication", EWSN 2015, LNCS 8965, 168 , 2015.

Acknowledgements

Authors' Addresses

   Dirk von Hugo
   Deutsche Telekom
   Deutsche-Telekom-Allee 9
   64295 Darmstadt
   Germany

   Email: Dirk.von-Hugo@telekom.de


   Behcet Sarikaya

   Email: sarikaya@ieee.org

















von Hugo & Sarikaya      Expires 12 January 2023               [Page 11]
